[Music]
good evening this is FBC news I'm Jackie
Spate in this bulletin parliamentary
committee considers flag
petition Suba businessman charged for
possession of elicit drugs and prime
minister V Bama launches National
environment
week the Parliamentary standing
committee on Justice law and human
rights hasn't yet decided whether to
allow public submissions on the petition
calling for a referendum on changing the
national flag however today public
submission started for three other bills
before the committee which include an
inaugural bill on the protection for the
national flag a coat of arms Bill and a
bill to amend the employment relations
promulgation Maggie Bo with the story
opportunity in March opposition MP Bill
Ted a petition with 1500 signatories
calling for a referendum on changing the
national flag committee chairman ashnil
sodaka says this matter is now being
deliberated but a question mark Looms on
whether or not to take public
submissions the actual uh
petition is been is under consideration
by the committee then that's all I can
say about it but we are the committee
decided do some groundw on the partition
uh itself to see if there is any basis
and uh you would have heard this morning
that I as the one of the questions
raised to the general was is there any
law on on the flag and is there any law
on referendum in the country uh prior to
uh this these bills coming into force
and there are none also before the
committee today were the solicitor
general Sharad Sharma and his team of
drafters presenting a brief on three
bills the code of arms Bill the national
flag protection bill and the employment
relations promulgation Amendment bill
sudaka says the brief will guide their
discussions with public submissions for
these bills beginning this week copies
of the bills are available on the
Parliamentary website people are encour
to read those bills and see what changes
they they thinking uh to uh should be
made to the actual Acts or if there any
changes to the bills itself and they can
then uh make submissions to the
committee or submissions the deadline
for public submissions on all three
bills is the 12th of June as to whether
or not public submissions will be made
on the flag referendum petition sudaka
says a committee decision is expected
soon Maggie Bole FBC news a 31-year-old
businessman of nambo sua appeared at the
sua magistrates court today charged with
unlawful possession of illicit drugs
rahes Chan's shop was raided last week
after a tip off that he allegedly
received stolen items Chan was arrested
on Thursday after the raid where white
crystals believed to be illicit drugs
were found in his possession The Raid
was the result of Investigations in
relation to a number of robberies in the
southern division involving five men who
have since been charged a separate
investigation is continuing in the
discovery of a large amount of glue in
shop investigators have discovered that
the suspect does not hold a valid
license to sell glue Chand has been
released on
bail sustainability is the key to
keeping Fiji beautiful prime minister v
b marama made the comment while
launching environment week today Alik
Kimia has more sustainability should be
at the top of everything we do in order
to protect our country and its
environment speaking to students and
guests in val levu prime minister V
marama urged everyone to think how they
can help protect the environment and the
country so let us join hands as a nation
and use national uh environment weakness
to make a solemn promise to ourselves as
fijians that we will all strive as hard
as we can to protect our surroundings
and the world in which we live take
great pride in keeping Fiji clean and
Fiji green Bama says the government has
embraced sustainable development well we
should not liter and put more Rish pins
and organize more campaigns to keep Fiji
beautiful and clean I think that uh in
order to to to to keep to to to maintain
it beautiful uh to to stress up this
cleaning campaign and uh to to keep our
source beautiful I think we need uh a
lot of awareness to be done to the Young
Generation especially the primary
schools and the secondary cuz they can
know what is the environment week is
about with the theme 7 billion dreams
One Planet consume with care the
government is currently formulating new
sustainability plans for the next five
to 20 years Ali Kimia FBC News 12
memorandum of understandings have been
signed by the government in China's
thirdd largest city guandong theou
signing shows fiji's growing interest in
the most populous province in mainland
China akal has
more guangong is a coastal province of
Southeast China with a population of
about 100 million 12 commercial and
government m signed today range from
strengthening cooperation between sua
and its capital city guango city trade
Health tourism and education they will
contribute to the Improvement of Social
and economic relations and develop
active technical cooperation between the
countries in their respective
areas the commercial M us will be
conduits for the growth of bilateral
trade and investment by Guangdong
Nationals in Fiji Guangdong is an
important International Market for trade
investment consumption tourism and a
global manufacturing center its trade
with Fiji now accounts for 1/5th of
China's total trade with
Fiji gongdong is comprehensively
deepening the reform promoting a pilot
project of free trade zone in a prudent
way and building a high level system of
investment and trade regulation which
align with International practices
fiji's celor General to Shanghai neeni
says this shows Fiji is progressing well
that uh the work that's been uh
conducted out there in China has uh
shown the the fruits now that a lot of
um interest in Fiji has been created and
uh that is why uh this team is here Fiji
has a special connection with Guangdong
Province as a large number of fijians of
Chinese descent are from there trade
flows between Fiji and China have been
flourishing in recent years and the
total trade value between the two
countries Grew From 220 4 million in
2010 to $990 million in 2014
representing an increase in
approximately 342 per. AK tal FBC news
the police force is concerned about
attacks on its officers who are
responding to reports of criminal
activities in the last few weeks there
have been at least three reports of
suspects attacking police officers
including the police commissioner Major
General Ben hunald Ellen stalls reports
this was the crime scene from a little
over a week where Police Commissioner
Major General Ben hevad was injured
while trying to stop attackers from
robbing a Bottle Shop from restaurant
assistant Commissioner of police chief
of operations rusiate tundu says they
have seen an increase in attacks on
officers uh the only thing that we are
doing is trying to to look at the way
that we can approach uh uh the crime
scene again um plan uh well ahead rather
than confronting criminals in the manner
that we have seen in the last few
instance srau says bat tortures and
handcuffs are the AIDS issued to police
officers speaking on fbct TV's for the
record program about a fortnight ago
Police Commissioner Ben hevad said
police are looking into acquiring taser
guns uh that is uh the world renown uh
new way of of of arming police officers
uh in terms of these typ of crimes so
that you can defend yourself without a
legal a Lethal Weapon while discussions
are continuing about the use of taser
guns police are looking at other ways to
handle their attackers tundu added the
public needs to know that they are doing
all they can given the limited resources
available to them Ellen stalls FBC
news still to come Farmers learn more
about offseason vegetable
farming
[Music]
fore
Farmers from Fiji have joined their
counterparts from five other Pacific
island countries to learn about
technologies that will support offseason
vegetable farming the workshop is being
held at the Singa Research Center
Christopher Chand
reports the Pacific Island Farmers
Network organization or Pon is hosting
this seminar to educate Growers about
how to farm vegetables during the off
season one of the things that we've been
discussing already is that consumers
they want to eat the vegetables that
they want to eat no matter what month it
is and this is uh a challenge for our
Farmers to grow their vegetables year
round the tourism industry Imports
vegetables like tomatoes capsicum and
English cabbage to name a few which are
not available throughout the year these
are products that our farmers can grow
during the offseason but it's much more
difficult so what this training is is
looking at is how we can share
Technologies and experiences with those
Farmers to capitalize on uh on growing
these crops during the offseason Fiji is
considered to be a leader in agriculture
in the South Pacific region and we have
through our experiences in the past
learned quite a lot and uh we are now
prepared to share our experiences with
with the region local and Regional
Farmers have come together to enhance
vegetable production uh the main reason
why farmers are not growing vegetables
in the offseason is because of excessive
rain and high temperatures and the high
incidence of pest and disease during
this time this is a challenge that has
been that exists for the whole region
not as Fiji and uh it's an it's an issue
that everyone's been talking about and I
think we need to to take this issue head
on it's another important step in the
development of the agriculture sector
the hope is regional farmers will go
back to their countries inspired and
motivated by the experiences shared with
them this week Christopher chant FBC
news three suspects involved in a series
of robberies have been remanded in
custody and will appear in the laoka
high court on June 10th josu Sami me and
vovo all aged between 19 and and 20
years old were charged for aggravated
robbery and theft dumu has four cases
against him two files are for previous
matters he will appear again in the 90
magistrates court on June 15th to answer
to the first two cases of breach of
order and aggravated robbery magistrate
Muhammad AAR has remanded all three
suspects after they were produced in the
nandi magistrates Court this
afternoon the new company's act requires
all registered businesses to file
Financial disclosures with the register
of companies this was an issue brought
up by some commercial entities during
public submissions however speaking on
fbct TVs for the record last night
ashnil sodaka the chair of the standing
committee on Justice law and human
rights assured that all necessary
protections will be in
place the company's Act was passed in
the last Parliament session becoming the
governing law for all companies not all
commercial entities are happy with a
requirement to disclose their finan
records to the regist of companies that
was that was the submission and
perception of some of the uh submit who
came to the committee is that if I'm
doing a private business if I'm earning
x amount of dollars why should I show
the people the public of what money uh
what amount of money I'm I'm earning but
you see uh you have to balance the the
privacy issues with with public policy
issues at some stage ashnil sudhakar who
chaired the Parliamentary committee
agrees that some companies are sensitive
about their financial records being
available to a third party under the act
the regist is allowed to make public the
said records if deemed necessary it's
not that uh once you file your accounts
um once you file your documents
financials it doesn't become uh
automatically available to the public
you have to ask the you have to go to
the register's office you have to ask
and if to uh the word they used is the
register May disclose the accounts daer
says there will be specific regulations
under the ACT which are bound to cover
these concerns the ACT is expected to be
ascented to by the president shortly
Edwin nand FBC news Regional peace
Builders have gathered in soua for the
Pacific Civil Society Forum on peace and
security The Forum coincides with the
week of the Forum Regional security
committee meeting it's an annual event
which began in 2009 highlighting the
role of the Civil Society including
supporting the participation of women
and youth in the preven of conflicts and
building and sustaining peaceful
communities this year we have decided
that given the range of global issues
but also given what's going on in our
region it's really important that we
strengthen solidarity so the networks
that are present are also networks like
the Pacific Conference of churches and
other Regional Civil Society networks
working on the issues of peace and
security 21 participants are attending
the Forum which will end on Wednesday
[Music]
relationship with ysen has been achieved
and Promises huge education
opportunities in the future and we turn
to sports now here is Jamie with the
very latest ja and welcome back it's
good to have you back in studio thank
you so much anyway coming up in sports
tonight Fiji under 20 football site
succumb to tournament favorite Germany
this afternoon and Telecom Fiji Warriors
record third and final win on South
American tour that's coming up after the
[Music]
break
gold FM only the classic hits beautiful
song from the group firehouse and when I
look into your eyes before that you
heard from Smokey Robinson with one hot
beat we'll take a short break and join
us in the next hour for more music from
[Music]
seal I'm DJ Tora join me every week days
7 until midnight on the premium Classics
right here on gold FM only the classic
hit remains a drug High not the did you
[Music]
know the vone Fiji football side were
beaten 8-1 by Germany in The Opening
match of the FIFA under2 World Cup this
afternoon Fiji trailed 60 at the break
but returned with a better second half
performance meanwhile thousands of
people around the country watch our
Fijian boys perform at the FIFA event
event for the first time here in the
capital people flocked into malls where
FBC TV was accessible to watch our
National Juniors take on the Germans FBC
TV will also air live fiji's other two
pool matches as well as the semi-finals
and
final fiji's next match is against
Honduras at 4 p.m. on
Thursday the Telecom Fiji Warriors
defeated Uruguay 4222 this morning
ending ending a South American tour
unbeaten halfback cupelli wo was the
toast of the Warriors side scoring a
total of 22 points courtesy of a try
three penalties and four conversions
nenton vaser scored two tries with John
Stewart and keny Douglas also dotting
down
tries 10 players in the Warriors side
have been included in the vone flying
Fijian extended squad for the Rugby
World Cup the team will return to the
country on
Wednesday the Fiji Hockey Federation is
taking great strides to prepare the
national men's and women's teams for
regional competitions later in the year
with a main focus on the Pacific games
in July the association is looking to
send its best players to compete tadaka
reports Fiji hockey is confident of a
good outing at the Pacific games in Papu
guini this will not be the only focus
for Fiji with the Oceania Championship
also coming up in New Zealand this
October we are now just working towards
paying off our levies
uh for the Pacific games but we're also
having now to also concentrate on
preparing for the Oceania Cup fiji's
last Taste of international matches was
the hockey World Series round one in
Sila last year Fiji hockey has put in
its bid to host the tournament again
this year with more teams to compete
putting an application to host World
Series 3 which will be held next year uh
and from what international hockey is
saying they're looking at getting other
teams to come apart from the Pacific
island teams so next year is our
Centenary and it's all uh starting quite
quickly in terms of uh preparations Fiji
hockey will be making its return to the
Pacific games after missing out in 2011
there is an air of confidence within the
team camp that they will return with
medals come July tyak FBC
sports that's it from sports tonight
Jackie is up next with sorry my
apologies before I go a very special
message
I'd like to wish this mischievous
looking girl a very happy birthday and
if you're wondering who those chubby
cheeks belong to that's the one and only
Jackie's pain happy birthday Jackie you
feel apart from feeling older do you
feel
wiser yes you feel a bit wiser I hope so
much more wiser than you thank you so
much I'll take it I'll take it and if
you want to wish Jackie happy birthday
send her a picture send her a message
with the hashtag the real t one send
your messages on Twitter Instagram
Facebook she'll get them no worries back
to you
Jackie the Fiji Airways A330 aircraft
which was recently damaged in a Tarmac
incident comes back tonight the aircraft
was sent to Australia for repairs after
being hit by a supply truck operator by
Air Terminal Services Fiji Airways
confirms the A330 is flying the Sydney
to 90 route and is scheduled to land
tonight an ATS loader backed into the
cargo section of an A330 air aircraft
like this one on May
16th due to the substantial damage the
flight was canceled with all 273
passengers put on another plane Bound
for Los Angeles the next
[Music]
day
cloudy periods with a few showers
prevailed over the interior and Eastern
parts of the larger islands whereas fine
weather prevailed elsewhere a trough of
low pressure lies slow moving over the
Solomon Islands another trough affects
North and Southern Cooks suen saavu
recorded the lowest temperatures at 28°
while Bayern lambasa had the highest at
31° forecast for tomorrow cloudy periods
with few showers over the Eastern parts
and interior of the larger islands
elsewhere fine further Outlook fine
apart from brief showers over the
Eastern parts and interior of the larger
islands and recapping our main
Stories the Parliamentary standing
committee on Justice law and human
rights is yet to decide whether to allow
public submissions on the petition
calling for a referendum on changing the
national flag a 31-year-old businessman
of nambo Suba has been charged with
unlawful possession of illicit drugs and
prime minister v b marama has urged
everyone to think of how they can help
protect the environment and the country
as he launched a national environment
week now to the results of last week's
poll question our question was should
there be a stricter requirements for
getting a driver's license 69% of the
votes said
yes to our poll question of the week
should retail opening hours be extended
all over Fiji visit our FBC website to
take part remember you can send us
newsworthy pictures and videos on email
citizens eyes
fbc.org FBC news and if you're on
Twitter follow and tweet us your news
tips at FBC news or simply # FBC news
you've been watching FBC news I'm Jackie
Spate good
night